A lot.
Welcome back to the course on blog Shane.
And today we're going to be understanding mining difficulty.
Now we did talk about mining difficulty when we talked about the mining target in Munjal one.
Today we're going to develop a much deeper understanding of mining difficulty.
All right so let's have a look.
Today we're going to answer the following two questions.
The big one is what is the current target and how does that feel.
And I'm a big believer in intuition in understanding things on an intuitive level and that's what we
going to aim to develop a feeling for the current target.
How does it feel if if you were a miner if you were a miner mining Bitcoin or any other currency for
that matter how would it feel to have that difficulty imposed upon you.
What would that imply because that understanding in my view is beyond that basic foundational understanding
is when you understand things like logically and how they work.
But that feeling for things will give you that better.
Where is that intuition that can help you come up with ideas and see see these things from a different
perspective.
And number two is how is mining difficulty calculated.
We're going to introduce the term So we've been using mining target and mining difficulty interchangeably
up until now but they're actually separate terms and we're going to introduce fighting difficulty and
see how the two are related.
All right so Question 1 What is the current target and how does that feel.
Well we spoke about target in this tutorial in Module 1 and as you recall we agreed to use a leading
zeros to talk about the target.
And what I wanted to point out here is that this chart this diagram is extremely disproportionate.
And how do we how can we see that.
Well right now it looks like by setting a target of four leading zeros you know we are reducing this
pool size the valid pool size to about a quarter.
So this looks like a quarter of the total.
Right.
However if you in a hexadecimal number if you request even one leading zero just one leading zero at
the start you're going to effectively reduce the pool size by 16 times.
If you do two leading zeros Elby 61 it will be one sixteenth of 160.
If you do three leading zeros in this purple part this valid part will be one sixteenth of 116 116 so
tiny.
And would it be evil even visible on this chart on this diagram if we tried to plot 40.
And how do we get our heads around that.
Well the best way the way I think about it is let's look at a decimal system number and a decimal system.
Yeah.
That's compared to numbers one where you have five digits and one we have five digits.
But the first one has to be a leading zero.
So effectively you have four digits.
So in the first case you have options from zero to ninety nine thousand one hundred ninety nine 100000
options and in the second case zero to nine thousand eight hundred ninety nine it's only 10000 jobs.
So by requesting one leading zero we're effectively reducing the pool size by 10 in a hexadecimal number
because every digit can have 16 values.
We have three leading zero is reducing the pool size by 16.
So that's already helping us build better get a better feel for what's going on.
So in reality even one leading zero is going to significantly reduce our options because right now it
looks like if we pick any random number in your random non-SS then we will have like a 25 percent chance
of getting a golden hash.
But in reality it's much much less.
OK so let's develop that even further.
So this is the current target.
We'll talk about where to get it in just now and a bit later.
But this is our current target.
Again we're just going to focus on the leading zeros the rest is is like not going to make much of a
difference compared to leading zeros leading zeros 18 leading zeros at the time of recording this video.
So let's do some estimations.
What can we get from 80 leading zeros.
You know we already saw what 40 things are feels like what has 18 zeros.
There some estimates estimations we're going to calculate the probability probability of getting a golden
Montse or randomly picking a nonce and build that will be golden locks.
Well how do we calculate the problem.
First of all let's see how many total how many numbers with 64 characters how many hexadecimal possible
combinations are.
The answer is 16 to 64 which is approximately 10 to the power of Sony so.
So we're going to underline that refresh.
And then second question is how many possible combinations are there how many possible hexadecimal combinations.
I mean we have 18 leading zeros.
Wow.
The answer is 16 to the power of 64 minus 18.
Because on this digit you can have 16 options 16 options 16 options 16 options and so on the 16 options
and a total of 16 times 16 times 6 and then 16 64 times 64 minus 18 times because we can't touch these
we of replace these these have to be zeros.
64 minus 18 that's approximately 2 to a power of two times ten to about 55.
We get that either.
So as you can see that's our big pool that's our total pool and that's how restricted pool that's our
pool where the golden Launce's are you can see it's quite a lot of numbers tend to about 55 that's a
lot of numbers but in comparison to this one it really fades into part of the vibe is almost nothing
compared to tens of heart was in seven.
So the probability that a randomly picked hash is valid or that are generated by a randomly pick lawn's
is going to be a valid or a gold and not gold and bonds is going to come from a.
What's going to get valid cash basically.
So the possibility of that is two to a two time Cenziper huge fight that number divided by that number
is.
That's what we were after.
That's the feeling.
So just look at that number.
That's the percentage probability of getting a a that the nonsense you pick is going to be golden locks.
That's like a random pick.
How does that number make you feel.
That's that's probably like I don't hold water.
But that's probably much less than winning less chances than winning a lottery.
How insane is that.
That's so that's what my hair is doing.
So no surprise that there's like those machines are working and working and working because the probability
that any given loans is going to be is going to generate a valid hash and therefore that machine or
that minors are going to be allowed to create the blog.
So low is tiny.
That's the problem and that's what the current difficulty as you can imagine.
If the difficulty is adjusted then this is the difficulties increase the number of users increased.
Then what happens this number stays the same but this number goes down because 18 becomes like is out
at like 30.
And that means this will be lower.
This will be lower.
This will be all over.
This will be all over again.
So there we go.
That's how that's a feeling.
Like Hopefully this illustrates that it's not it's all like a 1 1 1 in 4 chance of getting or not it's
a tiny tiny tiny chance.
That's what this whole cryptographic puzzle is about.
And now we're moving on to question 2.
It's a good segue into question 2 How is mining difficult to calculate and how is it adjusted.
So let's have a look.
Mining difficult the right difficulty.
The definition is the current target divided by the max target where the max target is.
Well we know the current target that's our current target and the max target is this and we'll get to
that in a second.
So first I wanted to make a comment.
How often is difficulty adjusting difficulty is just that every 2016 blocks those thousand 16 has nothing
to do with the year is because it's two weeks every block should be ideally should be block should be
released every 10 minutes.
So if you calculate that how long it takes in 2016 glossaries it's exactly two weeks or how many blokes
get recent weeks 2061.
So that's that's health and they're difficult to get some just that every two weeks.
And know don't you think that we still don't know here on the slide is the back story where did this
come from what is this target or about.
Well this next target is the target that was in place at the very inception of Bitcoin.
They started out with this target.
And so why did why did they start out with this target.
Well you know this is not the maximum hash maximum you know hexadecimal number maximum hexadecimal number
would be like f f f f f f f f f f all the way.
So they are like in a decimal system or be 9 9 9 9 f is the highest digit in hexadecimal so it would
be all F's.
Why didn't they start of that.
Well the answer is that the the one we're thinking about is that all F's is at the very top.
It's like at the very top.
So if they started out with the math with the target at the time being at the very top then every single
time a miner would pick a nons it would be a golden dots every single time they would like.
They would just mind blocks very quickly of every iteration they would mind a block.
And therefore they would mine out all the Bitcoins too quickly even before the first two weeks passed
just that difficult.
So they intentionally started with a difficulty that was that really had a lot of leadings it was really
had how many eight leading zeros at this time.
Now we've already moved to 18 so this is the max difficulty at the time.
This is at the very start.
This is the current difficulty.
And again this is extremely disproportionate.
So we know that this line should be a tiny little block there and this should be even a tiny small little
block over there.
But just for illustration sake that's that's what we're seeing.
And so how to understand difficulty on an intuitive level difficulty because it's the current target
divided by the back story.
Right.
So it's basically this line.
How high is this line divided by how high is that.
Is that line what is telling us is how much harder is it now to mine Bitcoin compared to what it was
at the very start.
So how much harder has it gotten to mind.
And that's exactly one difficulty says so compared to at the very start of mining Bitcoin.
How much longer does it take to mine Bitcoin now not longer because we know it takes 10 minutes how
much how much will power does it require How much how much.
How much less how different is the probability the ability to recalculate before what is what is the
relationship between them.
How much harder.
In essence how much harder is it to mind a bit.
And yeah.
And so there we go what we're going to look at now is some some charts to bring like bring all of this.
All right.
So his blog Shane dot com and we're going to go to we're going to go to oh yeah so we can go to data
we can just pick a random block and you can see from the hash so we can't get the current target.
Well at least the number of zeros you can get from here like that is going to be 18 zeros.
And because that's that's it's hash and you know sometimes you might get one of 19 zeros or 20 zeros
just by accident that gets that.
So best way to do is like look at a couple we got a couple of blocks and you'll see that they all have.
You know they all have the same location.
They all have the same number of leading zeros.
18.
OK.
That's number one and the other thing is what it won't do.
Oh I wanted to look at the charts so what I wanted to show you is
difficult to or has difficulty mining information difficult to go.
So if you look at difficulty you'll see this stepped chart was it stepped because the difficulty gets
adjusted every single two weeks and by the way also an important thing to note is that difficulties
is not adjusted by any central authority.
There is no like like bankers anything or block chain dot com that says Now the difficulty is going
to be this or that.
The difficulty is going to be that not at all.
We know that this is a decentralized system and we know that there's no central authority and that therefore
it gets adjusted by the nodes themselves.
So if you install the Bitcoin software your computer will be adjusting a difficulty on its own because
that algorithm is coded into the Bitcoin protocol.
And yeah.
And so they just Voelz sync up in the sense that they know when you know the two weeks started.
And when the two weeks ends and so on and like every two weeks you're on.
No it is going to look at.
OK so how long did it take for the past for past 2016 blogs to be mined and it knows that it takes about
10 minutes.
It should take exactly 10 minutes to my blog so should be 20000 or 160 minutes.
If it's more or less than that number then the difficulty gets adjusted.
That's how difficulty gets adjusted every note adjusted and therefore because the algorithm the same
they all get the same difficulty as you can see right now.
The difficulty is three trillion three trillion is the difficulty.
And that means it's three trillions three trillion trillion times harder to find a golden non-SS than
it was at the start of Bitcoin.
And what I liked about this chart is that right now I think it's like it's like a year and you can go
to oldtime and you'll see how it changed.
Voila.
So at the start guess what the difficulty was one that was won at the start because nobody was minding
Bitcoin and there was no need to change the difficult for a long time nobody really cared.
And then people started mining it more and more and more so as the mining power increases as more players
join they start mining faster.
That's the reason difficult change in mining the Bitcoins faster and faster and faster.
So they're they're the power or the aggregate power and then it is getting higher and higher or higher.
And so the algorithm has to adjust in order to keep that consistency of releasing and Bitcoin every
or releasing a block every 10 minutes in order to keep that consistent.
The difficulty has to be adjusted and the difficulty adjust is adjusted as we saw through the number
of leading zeros.
So as you can see it's it's a complex it's a complex system overall like philosophically.
But what I like about it is it's it's beautiful in its elegance it's beautiful in its simplicity that
all they are doing is changing the required number of leading zeroes every two weeks.
And that is keep it under control.
This whole swarm of minors and industrial level mining like organizations and mining pools as we'll
see that is all under control by simple algorithm and then you compare that to banking right to the
normal fiat currency currency.
What do we have there.
We have a central authority that is struggling to keep their economy under control by using macroeconomic
factors such as What is it called or policy such as interest rates rise like we're going to increase
the interest rate or decreased interest rate like the Reserve Bank of Australia increases or decreases
the interest rate every quarter as far as I know.
And you know and and you know I think they're doing a right job but like still it's it's so much calculation
so much work.
So of their countries are not doing not doing a good job and they have a clear incredibly high inflation
or you know their currencies are going like they are becoming non usable and they have crises and so
on.
But at the same time here we have something so simple compared to those systems and yet it works it
works like magic and is able to keep under control the proof that it works is that it's able to keep
under control so many different players that have you know been coming up with different ways of mining.
They used C-p use in GP use and A-6 We'll talk about this and still the system works system was just
prodding along.
So very cool and put that into perspective how how a loan how a decentralized system can actually perform
as good or even better than a centralized one.
All right.
So there we go.
Hopefully now you know everything about mining difficulty and on that note I look forward to seeing
you back here next hour.
Until then enjoy blood chains.